That's a good question.
I'll tell you a story, a confession.
When I went to library school in the dawn of the Cretaceous period in 1966, we were still, of course, everything was still manual.
Computers were used just at the margins of anything.
And we had a class on reference sources where we would practice with questions and look up the answer to the questions in the reference books.
And so we had a reference lab and it consisted of a room with copies of old reference books.
And then we'd have a little box that would have questions on three by five cards.
And you would answer a question and put it away and write down on your notebook.
And at the end of the hour, you would turn in your answers.
And I had a friend who at the end of the hour turned in 22 answers and I turned in two.
So that hit home.
I was used to doing well.
I'm a smart student.
I did well in my schooling and why was I such a doofus in this situation? So that got me interested in search.
Because after all, this is a key librarian skill that is still true.
And here I was going to library school and I couldn't do what librarians do half a tenth as well as my friend did.
So what I soon learned is that there wasn't much of any knowledge about this in the field.
It was just assumed that you would pick this up somehow, that you'd have an instinct for it.
But I didn't.
So it got me interested.
Well, how can you improve search? And I started looking for heuristics and techniques to improve search and eventually published an article called Information 
Search Tactics that was sort of my first big hit, if you will, because it had a lot of suggestions for how to find things more effectively.
And a lot of researchers since then have used the ideas in there to see in various experiments and stuff to see if people use those tactics in their searching.
This touches on something else.
I recently got a letter to the editor published in the New York Times magazine.

We'll put a link to that in the show notes.

OK.
It was in response to a previous issue where they had talked about women in computing.
And what I said in this was that so much of the design of interfaces is about dominance.
In that sense, it's it's very male.
We tend to create relationships with others.
Males tend to have an implicit competition with other males.
And, you know, for whatever reason, that's kind of how we find ourselves operating in practice.
And that bleeds even into the design of interfaces.
And one of the things that as soon as you talk about doing something with language, which was actually very difficult, people have been working on automatic 
translation and so on for 50 or 60 years.
And it's been a hard, long slog.
But if you talk to what I found again and again is that somebody designing a system wants to have everything be done automatically.
I think it is a dominance thing.
It's about you go out, little computer bot, and you find something for me and you bring it back to me and put it at my feet.
That's, you know, that's the male thing.
And not that men and women both don't have some of these tendencies.
I'm convinced.
But whereas women are creating relationships, that's the most that's the thing we do when we encounter a new person in our milieu is that we size each other up, 
but in a relatedness way rather than in a dominance way.
And we do this in the design of interfaces as well.
We tell the bot to go out and do something for us.
We don't set up a relationship with the system, which aids and assists us.
And we tell it to do X and it brings something back and we have an idea and then we follow up on this thing.
We don't create a series of features to the interface that enable you to enrich your search.
And it would be so easy to do that if you had the kind of Google resources, you know, but that doesn't that doesn't fit it.
So always, all these possibilities, an awful lot of the ways in which a computer can augment or support what you're doing are just brushed aside.
They're not if they're proposed, they're ignored, because it's all about power.
You know, it's all about having the computer do your will.
And so a lot of possible ways that you can interact with this are lost.
And when it comes to creating vocabulary like this, for instance, there's a huge difference between indexing billions of records, which is, you know, ridiculous, 
we all know, we can't do that manually, and having 100% automation.
What if you instead had some a few human beings, like 20 of them, working on vocabularies that you made available to people, so you got a lot of the crap out that 
comes up with automatic techniques, because they, they curate the vocabulary.
And you make these different augmenting features available to the searcher, all you need is 20 people, you don't need because you're not indexing each individual 
document, you're giving greater richness and possibility to the person doing the searching to match with the richness that's already there in the documents.
Sorry, I get I get launched on these things.
And then I know, sorry. 

you just need your group of librarians that you trained, they can do it.

Oh, there's, you know, people, one of the areas of information architecture is taxonomy and thesaurus design, and, you know, recognizing the terminology that's 
used in a particular work environment.
And that involves people, you know, it, we accept that, but somehow, even a relative handful of people is somehow wasteful.
And we have to do everything 100% automatic.
In fact, I think we could use the strengths of the machine and the strengths of the human in a much better coordinated way than we generally do.
