Hi, and welcome to UX radio.
So we are really looking forward to our conversation today.
I'm your host, Laura Federoff.
And I'm Chris Chandler.
Good morning, Marcia.

Good morning.
I have to say, it's always a pleasure.
I had the pleasure of working with Marcia at UCLA back around the turn of the century, I like to say now.
Sounds so funny.
Marcia, sometimes people are, they don't understand when I talk about the connection between what we now call user experience and library science.
There's often a puzzled look I get.
And I'm curious if you could talk about sort of, you know, people are surprised that librarians are so digital.

Right.
Yeah.
We're the original information people, which I am proud of.
There was a time when if you wanted to find something out, you couldn't look up on Google.
Your best chance to find it was to go to a library.
Now, that's way more complicated and difficult than searching on Google.
And so it's very understandable that we have all resorted to Google.
But people in my field have been thinking about these questions for a long time.
And certainly my particular interest, which always has been in search, you're searching in a library, you're searching in a library catalog.
That was the first place where most people were exposed to online other than an ATM was when you went to the library and you entered something 
into the library catalog, the online library catalog.
And then, of course, full fledged online.
So we've been at the heart of this whole question of how you search and how you find things for many decades.
So to me, it's seamless.
You go from the human being is the common element.
And I think we get so excited about these incredible technologies that we forget that the common element is the human being and our psychology, 
the way our minds work.
And that stays.
That's been there all along.
It adapts to each new technology.
But there are some sort of common core features about how we search that I think are still not adequately understood in our larger digital world.

What do you think is the main misunderstanding there?

I think a couple of things.
One, you assume that you come up with a term and you enter it in your search box.
What actually happens then is it's a psychological thing that happens that makes it actually more difficult for you to think of another word besides the one that
 you thought of initially.
And we're used to entering that word and getting a bunch of things back.
And we assume that's it.
You know, very straightforward.
But in fact, you're often interested in a more complex topic.
And you put in just the first word you could think of.
But it didn't occur to you that there are dozens of other closely related words that you might have entered and that would have gotten you completely different
 stuff.
And I came up with an example here of suppose you're interested in the whole migration controversies that we're having right now.

Well, you put in migration.
And if you try that on on Google, you'll see all the entries have migration prominently featured in them.
But it might be that what you're really more interested in is sanctuary, finding applying for sanctuary, or you're interested in refugees, flight, deporting, 
borders, defection, resettlement, diaspora, relocation, settlement camps, forced migration, internal migration.
You know, all of these are closely related terms.
And once you've thought of one of them, it's actually hard to think of any of the others.
And a basic psychological principle that everybody ignores is that recognition is much easier than recall.
So if you think of the word migration, you may not be able to think of all those other things.
But if you're shown a screen with a spray, an array of these terms, you can your eye will instantly go to the one that is actually what your main interest.
But we never give people that cluster.
And it could be done very easily.
Because all you'd have to do is click on the one that you like it if it's the same one you started with your home free.
But if you see when you look at this, oh, hey, there's this thing and this thing and this thing, you realize that it's more complex, that there's more angles to it.
And it's very common for what your real interest is to be one of those other terms.
And we don't give that to people.
We we assume that there are two or three terms for some topic that we're interested in.
There's actually 30 4050 terms.
And it would be very easy to handle this in an online system.
But nobody does it.
Because they don't realize how much that enriches your search and how much better search you can then do.
I've been proposing this for decades.
And there have been some tries at it, which I can I can tell you about if you want.
But there's one recently published article where they did do an experiment.
These were computer scientists, they did it completely automatically.
Not the way that that I've been proposing, but it was essentially the same thing.
And they got 100% improvement in the quality of the results.
100%.
You know, most of these studies is, well, we went from 71% to 74%, you know, and, and they're always down around there, you know, 100% better, 
double the performance, okay.
And yet, we just don't pick up on this.
The study I'm referring to is, was in CACM, January 2015.
And the author was named Tuka Ruotsalo with Finn, I love a name like that.
His last name is R U O T S A L O.
And if you want to look for something like this, it's not exactly what I'm proposing, but it's very similar.
And it has the same effect that gets this incredibly improved response.
But because it doesn't match anybody, he founded a company called Itsemo.
Itse and Finnish is to look for something.
He founded this company.
But it's having trouble getting these ideas across to it just runs against what everybody assumes.
So end of lecture.

I love how you talk about this topic.
And I'm really curious what drives your passion around search.
What is it in you that makes it so fascinating?

A couple things.
For one, the word cloud usually isn't clickable.
In other words, you can't just open that term.
For another, a word cloud is not technically the same as what I'm talking about.
I'm talking about a sort of cluster thesaurus.
If you look at the words in a word cloud, many of them are not closely related.
They're just the ones that happen to be used the most in a particular document.
These are ones that are closely related conceptually.
And it doesn't matter broader, narrow, or any of that traditional thesaurus stuff.
It's just a cluster of terms that show up in various topic areas.
And the reason that I even thought of this idea or started pushing it was that during the 70s and 80s, you used to be able to go into public and academic 
libraries and special libraries and order up a search that the librarian would do for you.
This was the original online world pre-internet.
This was done on telephone lines to centralize database collections.
And it cost several hundred dollars often to do one of these searches.
So the librarians who were trained in this, and I used to train these librarians, learned to do this very efficiently and effectively.
They did what worked the best and got the most productive results for their users.
And what they found that to be was doing what used to be called a hedge, which was a series of ORD terms, A or B or C or D, which they took from many different 
thesauri.
They realized after a while that it was the term variance around the core concept that mattered.
And it didn't even matter which thesaurus you got it from because you could find, especially on natural word searching, you could find a lot more highly relevant 
stuff.
And this idea was taken to the point of even producing a book that was a thesaurus for search that was done by one of the most experienced searchers at that time, 
a woman named Sarah Knapp.
And I have said book in front of me, and that's where I got all the terms for the migration example.
But it's several hundred pages long, and she shaped those clusters specifically for this purpose, for the purpose of search.
The word vocabulary and how it's handled is completely different from a traditional thesaurus.
And likewise, it's different from an actual word cloud.
So being able to show people these clusters of things, and this is a lot like Ruxalo did in the CACM thing, we don't recognize that recognition is easier than recall.
So if you just put the things out there, people can say, oh, that's what I wanted to use.
That's the term.
That's really what I'm interested in.
Or these three will cover it.
So in that sense, it's very unintuitive.
People don't think that way.
But in fact, we know that it pays off tremendously.
But you can't talk anybody into doing it.

That's fascinating.
Thank you.
I love that idea of sort of like working hard to make up a perceived deficit and having that become a lifelong strength.
That's a great story.
To go from the dawn of the Cretaceous Age into our hyper-modern 2019 milieu, I think people might be tempted to think to themselves, well, why do I need a 
human being to work on clustering search terms? It sounds like something I could just get a machine to do for me.
What are your thoughts on that? 

That's a good question.
I'll tell you a story, a confession.
When I went to library school in the dawn of the Cretaceous period in 1966, we were still, of course, everything was still manual.
Computers were used just at the margins of anything.
And we had a class on reference sources where we would practice with questions and look up the answer to the questions in the reference books.
And so we had a reference lab and it consisted of a room with copies of old reference books.
And then we'd have a little box that would have questions on three by five cards.
And you would answer a question and put it away and write down on your notebook.
And at the end of the hour, you would turn in your answers.
And I had a friend who at the end of the hour turned in 22 answers and I turned in two.
So that hit home.
I was used to doing well.
I'm a smart student.
I did well in my schooling and why was I such a doofus in this situation? So that got me interested in search.
Because after all, this is a key librarian skill that is still true.
And here I was going to library school and I couldn't do what librarians do half a tenth as well as my friend did.
So what I soon learned is that there wasn't much of any knowledge about this in the field.
It was just assumed that you would pick this up somehow, that you'd have an instinct for it.
But I didn't.
So it got me interested.
Well, how can you improve search? And I started looking for heuristics and techniques to improve search and eventually published an article called Information 
Search Tactics that was sort of my first big hit, if you will, because it had a lot of suggestions for how to find things more effectively.
And a lot of researchers since then have used the ideas in there to see in various experiments and stuff to see if people use those tactics in their searching.
This touches on something else.
I recently got a letter to the editor published in the New York Times magazine.

We'll put a link to that in the show notes.

OK.
It was in response to a previous issue where they had talked about women in computing.
And what I said in this was that so much of the design of interfaces is about dominance.
In that sense, it's it's very male.
We tend to create relationships with others.
Males tend to have an implicit competition with other males.
And, you know, for whatever reason, that's kind of how we find ourselves operating in practice.
And that bleeds even into the design of interfaces.
And one of the things that as soon as you talk about doing something with language, which was actually very difficult, people have been working on automatic 
translation and so on for 50 or 60 years.
And it's been a hard, long slog.
But if you talk to what I found again and again is that somebody designing a system wants to have everything be done automatically.
I think it is a dominance thing.
It's about you go out, little computer bot, and you find something for me and you bring it back to me and put it at my feet.
That's, you know, that's the male thing.
And not that men and women both don't have some of these tendencies.
I'm convinced.
But whereas women are creating relationships, that's the most that's the thing we do when we encounter a new person in our milieu is that we size each other up, 
but in a relatedness way rather than in a dominance way.
And we do this in the design of interfaces as well.
We tell the bot to go out and do something for us.
We don't set up a relationship with the system, which aids and assists us.
And we tell it to do X and it brings something back and we have an idea and then we follow up on this thing.
We don't create a series of features to the interface that enable you to enrich your search.
And it would be so easy to do that if you had the kind of Google resources, you know, but that doesn't that doesn't fit it.
So always, all these possibilities, an awful lot of the ways in which a computer can augment or support what you're doing are just brushed aside.
They're not if they're proposed, they're ignored, because it's all about power.
You know, it's all about having the computer do your will.
And so a lot of possible ways that you can interact with this are lost.
And when it comes to creating vocabulary like this, for instance, there's a huge difference between indexing billions of records, which is, you know, ridiculous, 
we all know, we can't do that manually, and having 100% automation.
What if you instead had some a few human beings, like 20 of them, working on vocabularies that you made available to people, so you got a lot of the crap out that 
comes up with automatic techniques, because they, they curate the vocabulary.
And you make these different augmenting features available to the searcher, all you need is 20 people, you don't need because you're not indexing each individual 
document, you're giving greater richness and possibility to the person doing the searching to match with the richness that's already there in the documents.
Sorry, I get I get launched on these things.
And then I know, sorry. 

you just need your group of librarians that you trained, they can do it.

Oh, there's, you know, people, one of the areas of information architecture is taxonomy and thesaurus design, and, you know, recognizing the terminology that's 
used in a particular work environment.
And that involves people, you know, it, we accept that, but somehow, even a relative handful of people is somehow wasteful.
And we have to do everything 100% automatic.
In fact, I think we could use the strengths of the machine and the strengths of the human in a much better coordinated way than we generally do.
