Yeah, there's a concept you just made me think of.
They call it human in the loop, which is in simulations.
It happens a little bit in some games, it happens in some flight simulators, but exactly that sort of idea, 
that it's really more the sort of partnership between the human and the computer system.
I love the, and I am guilty of the domination type behavior.
I think all the time about how my stupid machines should be my servants.
I think, so thank you for that.
Library science has been a traditional field for women professionally.
Do you see that as changing? 
Do you see that as a strength? 
How do you see that relating to the modern world we find ourselves in? 

Well, I think that's another one of these unfortunately gendered areas of our lives.
I think an awful lot of the wisdom of research over these past decades of people dealing with human beings, 
going to reference librarians and going to systems and having different features and affordances in the systems that 
you've designed and coming up with results for what does and doesn't work and so on.
There's a huge amount of that research, a huge amount of research about how people search for information and think 
about information and interact with people and takes information away from an interaction and so on.
This stuff is completely ignored because it's seen as the old.
And I've seen so many instances of this.
It just drives me crazy.
My colleague, it was not my, I wasn't in that department, but here at Berkeley, Ray Larson used to be in the department until he died recently, unfortunately.
But he had a sort of sideline consulting business where people would call him up and say, we want to prove in our lawsuit that 
my company was the first one to come up with the X idea.
And he goes and he finds in the literature that the thing was invented in 1962, you know, and it wasn't.
And I've had the exact same thing happen to me.
I remember one time somebody talking to me about the idea of sending out stuff to people in their areas of interest.
Well, that used to be called selective dissemination of information.
And it was first proposed in 1959 by H.P.Loom, a computer scientist, as it happened.
But that idea was taken up in the field of library and information science.
You know, it wasn't just libraries.
It was information science, which blossomed in the 60s, where we were looking at information in all contexts, 
not just restricted to libraries and information in online systems as soon as those came in.
And they came in in the library world before they came in in the general world.
So we had a tremendous amount of knowledge built up in information science that has been pretty successfully totally ignored.
And it's so maddening.
It's just so maddening when you're doing all that work and writing all those papers, you know.
And one of the reasons I think is this stereotyping of the field.
If the word library comes up, then it goes instantly to the stereotype of the female with the button at the back of her head.
And I don't know where that came from, but it's reinforced every Christmas in that Jimmy Stewart movie, 
Wonderful Life, where if he hadn't lived his wife, she wouldn't have found another guy to marry and be happy with.
You know, she would have been totally bereft if he hadn't lived.
She would have lived out her life as a lonely librarian.
And they show her locking the door of the library at night when she leaves.
And that's how she spends the rest of her life.
You know, so these stereotypes are just so maddening.
And there was another thing.
There was an article by Nicholas Lehman in The New Yorker about some new feature that the smart engineers at Google had figured out.
It was dealing with the problem of, say, one term meaning several things like mercury is a god and a car and a substance and so forth.
And they went off and they solved this problem.
Well, sorry, folks, but people have been thinking about that for many decades in vocabularies.
And we had solutions, some manual and some automated.
And, you know, sorry, you weren't the first to think of this.
But when you think of something, it feels so new.
You just assume that you're the only one who's ever thought of it or science versus this ghastly stereotype.

How do you think we might go about changing that perception? 

You need somebody with much better marketing skills than I have or than people in my field tend to have.
I mean, it's clear that this really is about marketing.
We have unfortunately let the outside world create our image and have not done very much against it.
We tend to be sort of recessive personalities often.
And it is about marketing because what we do is so it's so often exactly the same thing that somebody is doing that 
they're getting 500 million dollars of funding for.
Excuse me.
We thought about that in 1982, but they get the funding and we don't.
So that's that's the difference.
It really is image, image, image, image.

Now, my confession time, I don't know whether I should feel bad about this or not, Marcia, but way back in 2001 or so, 
Lynn Boyden and I had the idea to teach a class in information architecture.
So Lou Rosenfeld and Peter Moraville, librarians at Michigan, wrote a book called Information Architecture for the World Wide Web.
Yeah.
And over the last 15 years or so, I've recruited many library science students and graduates to come into the tech world.
And I have to say, at first, I thought, what an amazing thing.
What a resource.
Here are these incredibly smart, talented, dedicated, mostly women in these classes,
And I Lynn and I come in and we say, well, you can go work at a tech company and make maybe twice as much or three times as much in your starting job.
And so I I've always had this like, you know, dual feeling of like on the one hand, I think it's great.
On the other hand, I wonder how other librarians feel about this connection between the library, the library's students and the tech world.
How have you seen that? How has that appeared to you? 

Well, see, from the very beginning, I when I got into the program in 1966, 
that was the beginning of what was then called information science.
And it was an explicit effort to make this about information in all of its contexts and uses, not just about a particular institution called the library.
And I have always taught that way.
So when I teach students how to search, it's about how to search in any context.
It's certainly not limited to this particular historical institution, you know.
And so I've never seen that conflict here.
I know for some librarians there is, but there never has been for me.
This is always about I got really excited when I was a graduate student about what was then called information seeking and use.

And there were a number of studies that had already been done that were very redeeming and countered a lot of people's assumptions.
Just to take a sort of obvious one.
Previously, people thought when you had some technical question, you would go look it up in a technical book that would have 
the information and you knew the information would be correct.
People don't do that.
People ask their friend on the next table over.
They call up the vendor because the vendor has worked with this particular thing a whole lot.
And so they call the vendor.
You know, this was the stuff that we were learning in 1965.
That was the stuff that my mentor, Bill Paisley, was doing research on in those days.
And the first chapter on information seeking and use that appeared in the annual review of information science and technology in about 65 or 68, 
somewhere in there, was written by Bill Paisley.
And it's it could be written today.
There's nothing ancient or out of date about it except the lack of digital resources.
But otherwise, it's got so much in it about how people use these things in their work and so on.
That is a part of the general.
See, to me, I meant to say that the Encyclopedia was actually the Encyclopedia of Library and Information Sciences.
And we said that in the plural because we think there are many information sciences and librarianship was just one of them.
In fact, I wanted to call the Encyclopedia the Encyclopedia of the Information Disciplines.
But that, you know, the publishers wanted to go with what was familiar and so forth.
And we tried to cover them all.
We tried to work in parallel on records management and archives and museology and documentation and bibliography.
And, you know, there's just a slew of them.
Medical informatics on and on.
There's all these different information fields.
And that, to me, is because at the core, it's all about information and human beings relationship to that.
And that doesn't require any particular institution to be a valid area of study.

I'm curious, where would you like to see this industry evolve in, say, five, ten years? 

Well, I certainly think it's unfortunate that 
so much of the information about us as people has been commercialized and seen only for its commercial possibilities and 
just completely blowing away privacy and ways of helping people.
People are not put at the center of the information world nowadays.
Instead, it's all about making as much money off of their data as possible.
And I think this has got it really wrong.
I think it would be great if we could find a way to turn that around and have a field that was focused on the people.
And that, I think, remains the strength of the different places around the country that call themselves iSchools, which is taking the information focus,
but also taking the people focus, because it's looking at human beings and their relationship to information for the sake of the human being, 
not for the sake of making money.
Not that money's bad.
Love money.
But you want to have a focus on the people as well.

Right.
I have a little bit of a cynical thought that came up while you were talking.
It's mostly around search engine optimization, and it feels like a very competitive game to get your search results at the top of the page.
And I have known some colleagues who were a director of taxonomy, but the goal was winning the competition.
It wasn't making the search results more valuable and meaningful with real, credible sources.
And that's kind of like the game versus the empathy towards user-centered design.

Yeah.
And I think that's probably the biggest thing that's been lost in rejecting the whole world of libraries and the traditional focus on information, 
was that it was about service.
It was about helping people.
And how can you best help them And that is just totally blown away in this.
And I think it's really unfortunate.
Again, it's going into this competitive thing instead of actually connecting humans, instead of just claiming it's connecting humans.

Marcia, we have a standard question that we like to ask, and that is, how do you see your legacy to this field? 

Well, it's very much on my mind because I'm 76 years old, and I am seeing all the ways in which I'm not current with some of the stuff that's happening in the field.
So it's a good question.
I think I toggle back and forth between thinking that I might have an impact and will be known when I'm gone and stuff like that.
Alternatively, thinking, well, this field and this body of learning that we have is being largely brushed aside in a culture that's focused on 
monetizing information and thinking pretty much only about monetizing information.
So I know be the little thing that gets washed to the side and is forever forgotten, except maybe some history student gets interested in it sometime, 
or someone who continues to have impact because at some point, somehow, 
the field gets excited again about the people at the heart of this and decides to focus on the people and put the other stuff aside.

That's wonderful.
I have one completely unrelated question.
I know you did some volunteering for the Peace Corps in Thailand.
I'm just curious, from that experience, what is one thing that you came away with from that experience? 

Oh, wow.
Many things I came away with.
I had been to Europe as a college student and had dealt some with the shock of a different culture and stuff like that.
But when I went to Thailand and was in upcountry Thailand, it was triple that.
It was so different.
It really taught me that stuff that you think is just human is often just your culture.
You need to be open and move beyond that and not be surprised if another culture does something differently than what you're used to.
I thought that was just an invaluable lesson to get out of that experience.

So good.

That's great.
Well, thank you so much for being on the show today.
We're really honored.

Yeah.
Thank you, Marcia.

Thank you for having me.
It's great to be able to talk with you about these things.
